[Wolf howls]
[Wind blowing]
[Bird cawing]
MAN: I think wolves are
probably the perfect
symbol of that earlier time before
we human beings set out to
conquer nature.
[Howling]
They're sort of the resistance
movement to everything that
we represent.
The brothers and sisters of
the wolves' ancestors are
the ones who came over to the
campfire to join our ancestors
and become our
most loyal pets.
The wolves' ancestors are the
ones who refused to come into
the campfire, and we've never
really forgiven them for that.
[Howling]
They remained free, wild,
undomesticated, dangerous.
And long after they no longer
posed a real threat to us
and our survival, I think we
still held it against them
that they were out there,
free and wild and dangerous,
and went out to do as good
a job as we could of getting
rid of them.
MAN: It is a better world
with some buffalo left in it.
A richer world with some
gorgeous canyons unmarred by
sign boards or superhighways,
undrowned by power or
irrigation reservoirs.
If we preserved as parks only
those places that have no
economic possibilities,
we would have no parks.
And in the decades to come,
it will not be only
the buffalo and the trumpeter
swan who need sanctuaries.
Our own species is going
to need them, too.
It needs them now.
Wallace Stegner.
PETER COYOTE: Since its
beginnings in the mid-19th
century, the national park
idea had embraced two equally
important, yet apparently
contradictory thoughts--that
the park should preserve
America's special places
in their natural conditions
forever and that they should
be open and accessible for the
enjoyment of all Americans.
Early park leaders had glossed
over any paradox, arguing that
the best way to protect the
parks was to build public
support for them by
encouraging more
and more visitors.
But with the end of World War
II, as the parks neared their
100th birthday and an
increasingly affluent
and mobile nation placed
demands on them as never
before, the balancing act
between preservation and use
would be severely tested.
MAN: It's hard to imagine
these places existing without
those tensions.
They are precisely the right
tensions that a democratic
nation should have as it tries
to figure out how to protect
lands that are there
for all the people.
COYOTE: The very definition
of what constituted a national
park would be challenged and
then broadened, and just when
it seemed as if there were no
pristine places left to set
aside as national parks,
a new one would be created
in the backyard of
one of the nation's
fastest growing cities.
While far to the north, in
the nation's last frontier,
the basic principles of
the park idea would be
reinvigorated for
a new generation.
MAN: I'm not quite sure why it
works this way, but we seem to
put our highest ideals in
our national parks.
They're like, um, homes
for our finest dreams,
and therefore they function
like consciences.
MAN: When you're standing
there silently in the presence
of the giant sequoias,
you can't help but recognize
that you're a part of
something that is way beyond
whatever it is that you
envision this world might be.
You can't stand there all
alone without understanding
that there's a power in the
world that is far greater than
anything that you've ever
experienced and that you're
connected to that power just
as that sequoia is connected
to that power.
It permeates all of us.
And when you understand that,
it improves your relationship
with your fellow man because
you realize that he has
the same capacity.
He has the same access.
He is your brother.
[Big band music playing]
COYOTE: In 1946, with the
war finally over and gasoline
rationing and travel
restrictions lifted,
attendance at Yellowstone
National Park quadrupled from
189,000 to 807,000.
Two years later, it would
cross the one million mark
for the first time
and never turn back.
MAN: All of a sudden,
everybody in the world wanted
to come to Yellowstone.
Everyone was tired of the war.
Everyone wanted recreation.
Everybody flocked to
Yellowstone in their own cars.
There weren't
enough campgrounds.
There weren't enough hotels.
There weren't
enough souvenirs.
There weren't enough anything,
and the buildings had had 4 or
5 years to deteriorate, so
the park facilities were
in bad shape.
COYOTE: All across the United
States, the same thing was
happening in other parks,
straining the entire system.
Nationwide, annual attendance
would climb from a wartime low
of 6.8 million visitors
in 1943 to nearly
32 million by 1950.
CRONON: One of the things that
happened in the 1950s with the
explosion of families in cars
taking their kids on the road
to visit the national parks
was that more and more
American children grew up
with the national parks as
a formative part of their
childhood, and I think we
often forget that in fact one
of the aspects of the national
parks that is most important
to our American-ness, to our
patriotism, is the fact that
they are landscapes of origin
and of childhood for
so many Americans.
They are the places
where we grew up.
They are the places where
we experienced our families
in some of their most intimate
locations and where our
families and our childhoods
connected to what it meant to
be an American.
MAN: It was just like being
in heaven, being in there.
In those days,
there was no road.
The park was all a blessed
wilderness, and I have often
thought since, what a
wonderful people we would have
been if we had wanted
to keep it that way.
[Thunder]
Adolph Murie.
COYOTE: Back in the summer of
1922, a college student from
Moorhead, Minnesota, named
Adolph Murie arrived in
Mt. McKinley National
Park in Alaska.
The park had been established
5 years earlier, but Congress
had only recently appropriated
any money for its protection
and development--$8,000 used
to hire a superintendent
and one assistant, who were
instructed to patrol 2,200
square miles, an area
half the size of Connecticut.
They were also expected to
keep poachers away from the
wildlife and prepare the park
for the tourists promoters
hoped would soon be coming
to see the highest mountain
in North America.
That year, a total of
7 showed up.
One of them was Adolph Murie,
who was there to help his
older brother Olaus,
a biologist, conduct a study
of caribou migrations.
Murie was 22 years old.
It was his first time
away from Minnesota.
MAN: Ade Murie was
not an imposing
or intimidating-looking
kind of a man.
He kind of had a Minnesota
farmer's look about him,
and I don't mean that as
an insult, but he was not
an overwhelming
person by looks.
He was,
however, in terms of character
and intelligence and durability
and stick-to-it-iveness,
a man to be reckoned with.
COYOTE: For 5 weeks, Murie and
his brother tramped for miles
across the tundra, following
game trails and the braided
gravel beds of glacial rivers,
exulting in the notion that
they seemingly had the park
entirely to themselves.
One day he came across
the lone footprint of
a grizzly bear.
MAN AS ADOLPH MURIE: In
innocent wonder, I gazed
at the imprint.
It was a symbol more poetic
than seeing the bear himself,
a delicate and profound
approach to the spirit
of the Alaska wilderness.
We come here to catch a
glimpse of the primeval.
We come close to the
tundra flowers, the lichens,
and the animal life.
Each of us will take
some inspiration home.
A touch of tundra will enter
our lives and deep inside make
of us all poets and
kindred spirits.
COYOTE: Adolph Murie's trip
to Alaska inspired him to get
a doctoral degree in biology,
and George Melendez Wright
recruited him for the Park
Service's newly formed
Wildlife Division.
By the late 1940s, Murie had
made a name for himself as
a top-rate field biologist and
as an iconoclast whose views
on the direction of park
policies often got him
in trouble with his superiors.
At Olympic National Park,
where wolves had been hunted
to extinction years earlier,
he called for
their reintroduction.
No one listened.
At Isle Royale in Lake
Superior, the moose population
had grown so plentiful
because of a lack of natural
predators, he wrote, that
the park looked "like
"a prosperous barnyard."
And at Yellowstone, Murie
objected to plans to build
a golf course and opposed a
proposal to drain a wetlands
around the Old Faithful Lodge
in order to reduce the number
of mosquitoes bothering
the tourists there.
MAN AS ADOLPH MURIE: Let us
leave a few wilderness shrines.
Let there be a few outstanding
scenes which can be viewed
without the attendant
chatter of the idly curious.
MAN: The heart of the
legislation that established
Yellowstone and the other
parks is to preserve
the environment.
It's as simple as that, and if
you're going to preserve
the environment, you have to
preserve the creatures,
the critters, that live there.
COYOTE: Like his mentor
George Melendez Wright, Murie
believed many long-held
assumptions about predators
needed to be scientifically
tested, and he spent two years
studying what to do about
Yellowstone's coyotes.
The answer, he concluded,
was not killing the hated
predators but changing
park policies.
SCHULLERY: When he produced
his study of the coyotes
in Yellowstone and
demonstrated that they weren't
this--this scourge on the
landscape and how they
actually functioned compared
to how people thought they
functioned, that they weren't
turning Yellowstone into
a reservoir of evil that
produced countless coyotes
that went out and killed off
ranchers' livestock, it took
a long time for that
lesson to soak in.
COYOTE: Yellowstone's
superintendent was so upset,
he shelved the report and
nearly got Murie fired.
Now one of only 3 biologists
left in the Wildlife Division,
Murie was dispatched to the
nation's most remote and least
visited national park--Mt.
McKinley in Alaska, the park
that had made such a profound
impression on him years
earlier, and once again
he would find himself
on the unpopular side of a
raging controversy when he
embarked on the first in-depth
study ever undertaken of wolves.
MAN: The wolf is the master
killer of all wildlife,
the villain in Alaska's
pageant of wildlife,
and the worst natural enemy
of sheep, moose, and caribou.
Alaska Game Commission.
BROWN: Wolves represented
death and destruction.
That bloodthirsty, ravening
wolf was viewed as a kind
of an interloper.
I mean, you had
the nice animals.
You had caribou and deer and
sheep, and here were these
wolves who would tear them
apart and eat them in full
view of visitors, and
that was anathema.
I mean, extinction
was the word.
COYOTE: Americans had been
killing wolves for centuries.
Despite a Park Service policy
against the extermination
of any animal species,
they had been systematically
eliminated at Grand Canyon,
Crater Lake, Death Valley,
Grand Tetons, Mt. Rainier,
Olympic, Rocky Mountain,
and after the death of two
wolf pups in 1926, Yellowstone
National Park.
Alaska was now virtually the
only place left in the United
States where wolves
still existed.
WOMAN: At one time, the Park
Service was ordered to shoot
every wolf they saw.
They figured that anything
a wolf gets, the hunter
doesn't get.
But just to shoot wolves to
say they shot a wolf--let's--
let's shoot Democrats.
Let's shoot Republicans.
I mean, it made
that much sense.
COYOTE: During his first
season back in Alaska,
Murie walked more than
1,700 miles, crisscrossing
the park, gathering data and
whenever possible taking
photographs and home movies
to augment his extensive
field notes.
He analyzed more than 1,000
samples of wolf droppings
to determine their eating
habits, collected 829 skulls
of Dall's sheep to study their
teeth and understand the age
and health of the
animals when they died.
His second year,
he discovered a wolf den.
MAN AS ADOLPH MURIE: On
a ridge across the river
from the den,
about a half mile or less
away, there were excellent
locations for watching
the wolves without
disturbing them.
I spent about 195
hours observing them.
The longest continuous vigil
was 33 hours, and twice I
observed all night.
MARTIN MURIE: Well, you've got
to have patience. Oh, yeah.
You have to be devoted.
If you have to climb a tree
in 30 below and sit there
for an hour shivering,
you do it.
Every day you're out there.
Doesn't matter
what the weather.
He was that type.
COYOTE: He would be at it for
nearly a decade, even moved
his wife and children to
a remote cabin in the park
and temporarily adopted a wolf
pup he named Wags so he could
study its development as it grew
from a nursling to full size.
Over time, Murie would get to
know wolves better than any
scientist ever had, and the
report he produced would
become a landmark in
understanding the species.
WOMAN: I often think if
we were to send
for a representative of our
species to meet with the
animals, we would send Ade
because he's a man who knows
how to listen.
He was a man who
understood stillness.
And more than anything,
his curiosity and his
extraordinary sense of science
opened up the landscape
in a new way for all of us.
He saw the land as a set
of relationships, nothing
in isolation,
everything connected.
COYOTE: Murie's conclusions
that wolves actually
strengthened the sheep and
caribou herds by culling out
the sick and the weak were
denounced by hunting groups
across the country as a piece
of pro-wolf propaganda from
start to finish.
As private bounty hunters
and federal Fish and Wildlife
Service officers initiated
a campaign of poisoning
and shooting wolves throughout
the rest of Alaska, pressure
mounted for the park
to eradicate its wolves, too.
In response, the Park Service
agreed to a limited wolf
control program, but the
person they selected to
oversee it was none other than
Adolph Murie, who kept the
number of kills to the barest
minimum, thinning out only
elderly wolves near the end
of their natural lives.
And when the sheep herd grew,
just as Murie had predicted,
the Park Service quietly
instituted a permanent ban
on all wolf killings.
It was the first time in
history that the species
nearly everyone seemed to
hate found protection from any
government agency.
McKinley's wolves
had survived.
MAN AS ADOLPH MURIE: Our
generosity to all creatures
in the national parks,
this reverence for life,
is a basic tradition and is
fundamental to the survival
of park idealism.
The goal is to have the
minimum of manipulation
in our parks.
Let us be guardians
rather than gardeners.
Adolph Murie.
MAN: With so many friends,
it is difficult to understand
why parks are so bedeviled by
threats and seem always to be
fighting for their
very existence.
The story is an old one.
There are frequent occasions
when people see nothing wrong
with harming, hurting,
marring, or spoiling when
there are valuable resources
of water, power, timber, oil,
or minerals to be exploited
within park boundaries.
Greatest of all threats to the
parks today is the pressure to
build dams.
Alfred A. Knopf.
COYOTE: By 1950, Americans who
needed dams for irrigation,
city water supplies,
and hydropower had been
in conflict for half a century
with other Americans who
wanted national parks kept off
limits from any development.
John Muir had fought and lost
the first battle when the city
of San Francisco used its
political muscle to win
federal approval for building
a dam in the beautiful Hetch
Hetchy Valley within
the boundaries
of Yosemite National Park.
The defeat had galvanized the
nascent conservation movement
into pushing for creation
of the National Park Service
in 1916 to make sure nothing
like Hetch Hetchy would ever
happen again.
Now in the aftermath
of World War II,
as the populations of states
in the arid west began to
skyrocket, pressure for
more dams only intensified.
With the enthusiastic backing
of virtually every elected
official in the region,
plans were drawn up for
9 billion dollars' worth of
dam projects, including two
in a remote corner of Utah
and Colorado where the Green
and Yampa Rivers converge in
the midst of winding sandstone
canyons, a place
known as Echo Park.
But Echo Park was also the
site of Dinosaur National
Monument, first set aside in
1915 to safeguard an important
discovery of prehistoric bones
and then expanded in the 1930s
to include the dramatic
canyonlands upstream.
Few people had ever visited
the monument or paddled
through its network of
canyons, but the handful who
had considered
it almost sacred.
MAN AS WALLACE STEGNER:
This is a country as grand
and beautiful as any
America can boast.
A 325-square-mile preserve
that is part schoolroom
and part playground and part--
the best part--sanctuary from
a world paved with concrete,
a world mass-produced
with interchangeable parts,
and with every natural,
beautiful thing endangered
by the raw engineering power
of the 20th century.
Wallace Stegner.
COYOTE: Even though the Park
Service opposed the dams,
President Harry Truman and
his Secretary of the Interior
supported them.
It was Hetch Hetchy
all over again.
It was exactly the same battle,
but the world had changed.
There were now many more
people prepared to say that,
wait a second.
The national parks are not
supposed to be breached
in this way.
We are not meant to
do this kind of work.
COYOTE: In 1952, with 2 of
his 7 sons and their families,
a 73-year-old retired
chemistry professor named
Harold Bradley made a week-
long trip down the Yampa
River, snapping photographs
and taking home movies as
they traveled.
They had imagined that a
desert region named Dinosaur
would be little more than
an arid, desolate boneyard,
one son remembered.
Instead, they found a world
of stunning beauty.
MAN: My dad knew that there
were plans on the drawing
board for dams in Grand Canyon
and dams that would affect
Glacier Park and
other parks, too.
If Echo Park Dam could be
built, I think a dam could
have been built anywhere in
the national park system,
and they'd say, "Well, you
let us do it at Echo Park.
"Why not do it here
in Grand Canyon?"
COYOTE: Back home in
California, Bradley embarked
on what he called "a one-man
crusade to save Echo Park" by
showing his home movie to
anyone who would watch it.
Among those who saw it
was David Brower, the new
Executive Director of the
Sierra Club--young and brash
with a flair for
public relations.
MAN: When I was 8 years old
and when my brother was 6,
we went down the Yampa and
Green Rivers, and it was part
of my father's campaign to
stop dams in Dinosaur National
Monument, and it--you know,
I look back on it now and I
realize what a piece
of history it was.
Many people see it as the
beginning of the modern
environmental movement.
My father used film,
used books, used trips like
this down the river.
He was building a constituency
of people to appreciate
this landscape.
COYOTE: Brower organized
Sierra Club outings through
Dinosaur's canyons and invited
influential Easterners to
join them.
Alfred A. Knopf, the New York
publisher, emerged from one
trip so impressed that he
commissioned a handsome book
of photographs and essays,
edited by the novelist
and historian Wallace Stegner.
Knopf himself wrote one of
the book's essays and made
sure every member of
Congress received a copy.
Other organizations sprang
into action, hoping to
mobilize public opinion and
kill the project in Congress,
where approval of the dam
seemed almost certain.
Harold Bradley helped persuade
the Garden Club of America to
oppose the dam and mail
leaflets to its members
encouraging them to write
their Congressmen about it.
The General Federation
of Women's Clubs did
the same thing.
My brother Steve was the
one that got Pop interested,
and Pop was the one who got
Dave Brower interested,
and Dave Brower, once he was
interested, kind of galvanized
the entire conservation
community, and Echo Park
really kind of put
conservation on the front page
for the first time instead
of something back
with the obituaries.
COYOTE: When mail began
pouring into Congress
at a ratio of 80:1 against the
Echo Park dam, the Speaker
of the House reluctantly
delayed consideration
of its approval.
Authorization for the larger
string of dams and reclamation
projects would eventually
pass, but without the ones
in Dinosaur National Monument.
Public opinion had been felt.
A new national environmental
movement had been born
and immediately began battling
against any other attempts to
despoil the parks and
America's wild places.
DUNCAN: You can save a place,
but it's never really safe.
It always takes people caring.
It always takes vigilance.
It always takes effort to keep
those forces at bay that want
to crowd in, want to
change it, want to
over-commercialize it.
Once it's ruined, it's ruined,
but once it's saved,
each generation has its
duty to keep it saved.
MAN AS WALLACE STEGNER:
Sometimes we have withheld our
power to destroy and have left
a threatened species like
the buffalo, a threatened
beauty spot like Yosemite or
Yellowstone or Dinosaur
scrupulously alone.
We are the most dangerous
species of life on the planet,
and every other species,
even the earth itself,
has cause to fear our
power to exterminate.
But we are also the only
species which, when it chooses
to do so, will go to great
effort to save what it
might destroy.
Wallace Stegner.
MAN: Charles Stevenson,
"Reader's Digest."
Drive to Yellowstone, as
my wife and I did late last
summer, and the moment you
enter, you are in a big city
traffic jam.
Pause to look at sights you've
come thousands of miles to
see, and cars pile up bumper
to bumper a quarter of a mile
behind you.
COYOTE: The 32 million
Americans who had crowded into
their national parks each
year as the fifties began had
suddenly become nearly 62
million before the decade was
even halfway through.
98% arrived by car.
The parks weren't
ready for them.
MAN AS CHARLES STEVENSON:
Yosemite Valley proper has
become a city festering with
commercialism and ugliness.
This spot, which Theodore
Roosevelt once called the most
beautiful in the world,
now boasts 3 acres
of burning dump.
Lovely meadows have been paved
to provide parking space.
Warehouses and stores
obstruct famous views.
The campgrounds pack in
about 97 persons to the acre.
Campers line up 15
deep for the toilets.
[Car horn honking]
COYOTE: "The people," a park
official said, "are wearing out
"the scenery."
The situation was the
same in every park.
To make matters worse,
staff levels and budgets were
no bigger, and sometimes
smaller, than they had
been during the Depression.
Meanwhile President Dwight D.
Eisenhower was pushing through
Congress the biggest public
works program in history--an
interstate highway system.
Conrad Wirth, the new Park
Service director, proposed
a similar 10-year plan for the
parks, timing its completion
with the agency's upcoming
50th anniversary in 1966.
He named the ambitious
project Mission 66.
"The national parks," Wirth
said, "are in danger of being
"loved to death," and he called
for spending $787 million,
more than half for new
construction, and the rest
for repairs, better
maintenance, and more staff.
The president enthusiastically
agreed.
Work began almost immediately--
fixing roads, modernizing
water and sewer systems,
improving campgrounds
and adding new ones, doubling
the park's lodging capacity.
Museums, rest rooms,
and information offices were
consolidated into a single
modern structure strategically
located to intercept large
numbers of people arriving by
car, prepare them for their
park experience through
a series of displays and
presentations, and send them
on their way.
Wirth called them
visitor centers.
Before Mission 66 was through,
110 of them would be built.
But as the work continued,
many of the park's oldest
allies became Mission
66's harshest critics.
They hated the
increased development
and the architectural
choices being made.
They thought the new
buildings were ugly.
The loudest complaints
came from David Brower
and the Sierra Club
and focused on highway
construction, particularly a
plan to bulldoze and pave the
Old Tioga Road across a long
granite escarpment, skirting
the shores of beautiful Tenaya
Lake in the high country
of Yosemite.
KENNETH BROWER: We went as
kids with my father because he
was photographing it, and we
were outraged because we had
the religion, and while my
father was photographing,
my brother and I said, "Well,
let's get to it," and we
started taking the
survey stakes out.
And we had gotten quite a
few of them out before my
father noticed.
It wasn't my father's style,
and he said no, we'd better
put them back.
COYOTE: In the end,
the road got built.
Some Sierra Club members now
questioned the entire premise
of helping more
people visit the parks.
MAN: I think the battle about
that road was the first moment
when the Sierra Club began
to realize that Muir's notion
that you had to bring people
to the parks to make them
value them and save them was
a two-edged sword--that if you
brought too many people to the
parks, you could ruin them,
even if the people
who came loved them.
COYOTE: The controversy
would forever tarnish some
of the real accomplishments
of Mission 66.
But the American people,
mostly unaware of the debate,
continued to flock to
their national parks.
Going to the parks was
becoming an American rite
of passage--journeys creating
memories that would last
a lifetime.
MAN: In 1959, my mother
took my brother and me from
Binghamton, New York,
across the west.
My father had died in 1958,
and we did the grand circuit
of the national parks.
My mother made us navigate.
She gave us the road maps,
and we picked the routes.
We chose the camp sites.
We had been to
Yellowstone for 3 days,
seen all the wonders, and then
dropped down into the Tetons
and Jackson Hole,
and I was hooked.
I was a lover and defender
of the national parks
for the rest of my life.
MAN: 1955 in the summer,
my wife and I and my little
boy spent the night in
Yosemite National Park.
My little boy had heard about
what you could see in national
parks, and he was particularly
interested in the bears.
He'd never seen a
bear in the wild.
At night, after we'd turn
out the lights, we heard the
garbage pails outside being
handled by some force, and he
said, "Dad, is
that the bears?"
I said, "I think so."
He said, "Let's
go out and see."
I said, "No. You can't
go out and see the bears.
"Just hope that they
will not bother us."
And I know that when I took
my son to a national park
for the first time that I was
planting in him the seed that
would cause him to want
to take his family to
a national park.
CRONON: I think for me,
the moment that the national
parks really changed my life
was when I was in fifth grade.
My parents put my brother and
me into the back of a Ford
station wagon, and we left
Madison, Wisconsin, and spent
6 weeks circumnavigating the
entire American west, but what
we were really doing was going
from national park to national
park to national park to
national park, and it was
so overwhelming, it moved
me so deeply, that it
changed my life.
I would not now do what I
do in my life were it not
for that experience.
Part of it was the vistas,
but what I most remember was
opening the door of that car
and getting out and walking to
some site with my parents,
and my father in particular,
who's a wonderful storyteller
and, like me, is a historian,
always having some story to
tell about the place that we
were in that carried me back
into layers of the past that
were also in the place that
we were in in the present.
And in that reconnection of
past and present, discovering
that there was far more to see
in the place I was in than I
ever would have imagined
without the stories that he
shared with me in that place.
DUNCAN: I grew up in
a little town in Iowa.
Both of my parents worked,
so we didn't take very
many vacations.
My dad would paint the house
during his vacation, or maybe
we'd go fishing in a lake in
Minnesota, but we never went
on real trips.
And when I was just
about to turn 10,
we decided, this year
we're going to do it.
We packed up borrowed camping
equipment from people we knew,
borrowed my grandmother's car,
and headed west.
Um, it was a great experience.
We went to the Badlands.
I had never seen
something like that.
Playing and running around
on that denuded,
bizarre landscape.
We went to Custer Battlefield,
as it was called then--the
Little Big Horn.
I found an arrowhead that I
was pretty sure probably was
Crazy Horse's.
It wasn't until I was a father
myself that my dad revealed
that he had bought that
arrowhead in the gift shop
and dropped it right
underneath me.
And then we came
to Yellowstone.
We arrived two days after
the great earthquake of 1959.
We lived through 3
or 4 tremors.
The earth was
shaking underneath me.
The forces that had created
Yellowstone were reawakening.
Half of the park was closed.
When we went to the geysers,
the rangers talking would say,
"Well, this geyser used to go
off about every two months.
"Whoop! There it is now."
Or "this one," you know, "hasn't
gone off since the earthquake."
The earth was in motion there.
We went to the bottom of the
waterfalls, and I thought,
"Boy, I am not
in Iowa anymore."
MAN: I'm probably the last
Secretary of Interior--this
was 42 years ago--who will
be flying along in a plane
and look off and say,
"Goodness, that ought to be
a national park" and seeing
it become a national park.
So it was a wonderful period
of expansion and of new ideas
in terms of what the Park
Service should be doing.
SINGERS: All the
leaves are brown
All the leaves are brown
And the sky is gray
I've been for a walk
On a winter's day
On a winter's day...
COYOTE: Throughout the 1960s,
Stewart Udall would serve as
Secretary of the Interior
to presidents John Kennedy
and Lyndon Johnson, overseeing
the most ambitious program
of creating new parks
since the time
of Franklin Roosevelt.
The pace of population growth
and development in the west
gave Udall, a former
Arizona Congressman, a sense
of urgency.
"What we save now," he said,
"may be all we save."
He joined forces with
the Sierra Club to push
for creation of Redwood
National Park along the
northern coast of California,
home to the tallest trees
in the world, which over
a lifetime spanning two
millennia, can grow 300 feet
high, requiring an environment
of rainfall, fog, and soil
found only in a narrow band
of land a few
hundred miles long.
By the 1960s, logging had
cleared 85% of the original
redwood forest.
The national park saved
half of what remained.
In west Texas, Guadalupe
Mountains National Park,
the ancient remains of
an ocean reef rising out
of the desert, had once been
the home of grizzly bears,
wolves, and buffalo, as well
as the Mescalero Apaches,
who used the mountain oasis
as a refuge until they, too,
were driven out.
"My Lord," Udall said when he
first saw it, "what a paradise
"that place is."
He also supported North
Cascades National Park,
a roadless wilderness on
the border of Washington
and Canada, containing
318 glaciers in its jumble
of mountains, nearly 1/3 of
all the remaining glaciers
in the lower 48 states.
And in the stark desert of
eastern Utah, where the Green
River meets the Colorado
amidst a seemingly endless
maze of meandering canyons,
is a place John Wesley Powell
had first described in 1869
as a "wilderness of rocks
"and a world of grandeur."
Powell had given the features
he saw names like Cataract
Canyon, the Dirty Devil,
the Labyrinth.
A hundred years later,
Udall helped give it all
another name--Canyonlands
National Park.
UDALL: I remember a
night when I woke up.
We were camping up on the high
cliffs, and I looked off into
what is the Doll's House
and the Maze, and the moon
came through.
It was like I was
transported into anther world.
There was a few minutes where
I just felt that I was having
an experience that I
would never have again.
COYOTE: Udall also helped
persuade Congress to set aside
other parts of the American
landscape and place them under
Park Service protection.
National seashores from Cape
Cod in Massachusetts to Padre
Island in Texas to Point
Reyes in California.
National lake shores like
Indiana Dunes and Picture
Rocks in the Great Lakes.
The Ozark National Scenic
Riverway in Southwestern
Missouri, the first in a
string of rivers that would
have portions kept in
their free-flowing,
natural conditions.
National trails like the
Appalachian Trail, extending
2,100 miles from
Georgia to Maine.
And national recreation areas,
often reservoirs behind
the dams being built
all over the west.
To help him, Udall named
George Hartzog the new Park
Service director, who brought
to the job the same energy
and back-slapping political
skills Stephen Mather had used
so successfully
50 years earlier.
Hartzog would push the Park
Service to have a greater
presence in urban areas,
to serve minority populations
that did not yet have a
relationship with the parks,
and to increase the number of
historic and cultural sites.
To him,
the park system's role
in preserving and interpreting
American history was just as
crucial as protecting
the large natural parks.
HARTZOG: My father,
from South Carolina, only made
one trip out of that state
during his lifetime, and that
was to visit our family
here in Washington.
And he said, "I want to
see the Lincoln Memorial."
Abraham Lincoln was not a
favorite historical personage
in the low country of South
Carolina when I was a boy
growing up, and neither was he
in my family and in our home,
and I was surprised that the
only thing he wanted to see
in Washington D.C. was
the Lincoln Memorial.
I started to get out of the
car, and he said, "No, I want
"to go alone," and I sat there
and watched him walk those
steps, and he got there and
stopped and faced Lincoln
and turned to the right and
went around that memorial
and read every saying of
Lincoln's and came back
and got in the car.
Tears were welling in his
eyes, although they were not
running, and he said to me,
"I'm now ready to go home."
That's what they mean.
CROWD SINGING:
We shall overcome...
COYOTE: On August 28, 1963,
Hartzog witnessed a much
larger crowd at the Lincoln
Memorial when a quarter
of a million people converged
on the National Mall as part
of the March on Washington to
protest the Jim Crow laws that
still discriminated against
African Americans in the south
and to call on Congress to
pass a civil rights bill to
bring them to an end.
There, a young minister
named Martin Luther King Jr.,
who had recently been jailed
in Birmingham, Alabama,
who the director of the
FBI considered a Communist
sympathizer and whose life was
in constant danger from people
who hated the color of his
skin and everything he stood
for, gave a speech that would
be considered a turning point
in American history.
KING: I have a dream that my
4 little children will one day
live in a nation where they
will not be judged by the
color of their skin but by the
content of their character.
I have a dream today!
[Cheering and applause]
This will be the day when all
of God's children will be able
to sing with new meaning "My
country 'tis of thee, sweet
"land of liberty,
of thee I sing.
"Land where my fathers died,
land of the pilgrims' pride,
"from every mountainside,
let freedom ring."
And if America is to be
a great nation, this must
become true.
[Cheering and applause]
And when this happens, we will
be able to speed up that day
when all of God's children--
black men and white men,
Jews and Gentiles, Protestants
and Catholics--will be able to
join hands and sing in the
words of the old negro
spiritual, "Free at last,
free at least, thank God
"Almighty, we're free at last!"
[Cheering and applause]
HARTZOG: What higher
purpose can a national park
serve than to be responsive
to the crisis in our society,
to the voice of the
underprivileged, to the voice
of the protester who's
objecting to the institutional
status quo, who is seeing a
need beyond where we are?
It was of the same dimension
as the first time I stood
on the south rim of the Grand
Canyon and looked at that
magnificent canyon
in front of me.
These are everlasting
moments that stay with you
and influence your
life all your life.
FRANKLIN: The idea of the
national parks certainly was
appreciated by Abraham
Lincoln in the 1860s.
A century later, here is
Martin Luther King giving his
great speech "I Have a Dream"
before a vast audience, before
Abraham Lincoln, and with a
park ranger standing by him.
You have this
sweep of history.
You have these dramatic turns.
You have these marvelous
coincidences and ramifications
that extend from Lincoln
to King, from the idea
of the national park to the
Park Service officer standing
by King when he gives his
"I Have a Dream" speech.
The parallels of history
are infinite and limitless.
COYOTE: 5 years later,
Dr. King would
be assassinated.
12 years after that,
his birthplace in Atlanta,
Georgia, would be dedicated
as a historic site, part
of the national park system.
[Wolf howls]
MAN AS ADOLPH MURIE: We were
approaching our cabin one
stormy night.
It was snowing and getting
dark, and out of the storm
came music, the long, drawn,
mournful call of a wolf.
It started low, moved
slowly up the scale
with increased volume.
At the high point, a slight
break in the voice, then
a deepening of the tone as it
became a little more throaty
and gradually descended the
scale, and the soft voice
trailed off to blend
with the storm.
We waited to hear again
the voice of wilderness,
but the performer, with
artistic restraint,
was silent.
Adolph Murie.
I think we all pick up certain
sounds or sights that are sort
of symbolic, and I think
that for Adolph, the sound
of the wolf meant wild,
nature, untamed but also
a part of the planet, a part
that we just can't do without.
[Wolf howls]
He felt very much like Thoreau
felt, I think, about wildness.
We got to have it.
COYOTE: When the Mission
66 plans had been unveiled
for Mt. McKinley National
Park, they called for widening
and paving the 90-mile rough
and narrow gravel road that
provided the only access
into the park's interior.
The road would permit a
showcase hotel near beautiful
and quiet Wonder Lake,
expanded campgrounds,
gas stations, and
a visitor center.
No one was surprised when
Adolph Murie came out against
it and submitted a detailed
analysis to the park
superintendent
outlining his concerns.
MARTIN MURIE: Adolph was just
passionately determined to
stop that road, and he was a
very stubborn person for what
he believed in, and we
need stubborn people.
He became more accepting,
more diplomatic as
time went on.
He became more forgiving,
but he knew how to draw a line
in the sand, and when it come
to things like that, Wonder
Park Road, he'd say no.
No.
BROWN: He was the
conscience of the park.
He stood like a rock on
these matters of principle.
He was not unduly cantankerous
or aggressive.
He just lasted.
He just wore away at them like
water on a granite boulder.
COYOTE: "My efforts were not
appreciated," Murie said,
and for the next two years,
he was reassigned to Grand
Teton National
Park in Wyoming.
When he was finally allowed to
return to Alaska to continue
his research, Murie was
dismayed at what he found.
The first 13 miles of park
road had been excavated
and paved, and at mile 65,
a visitor center was being
constructed that
looked, he said,
"like a Dairy Queen."
To stop further construction,
he turned to his brother
Olaus, now the director of the
Wilderness Society, for help.
MARTIN MURIE: He kept telling
Olaus, "Now, you got to write
"about this road."
He'd feed Olaus the data
about the road and say,
"Write about it.
You write beautifully.
"I can't do it.
You can do it."
COYOTE: Olaus Murie was
the perfect person to help.
He was accustomed to
waging public campaigns
and in a position to openly
challenge the Park Service.
This time, the Park
Service director listened.
That was the last frontier.
This is your last opportunity
to save virgin America is
Alaska, and it's enormous.
COYOTE: Hartzog stopped the
roadwork where it was--13
miles widened and paved,
another 17 widened
but unpaved, and the remaining
60 miles to be kept in more or
less the condition Adolph Murie
had suggested--a narrow
gravel pathway where, he said,
"the feeling one gets is that
"the road passes through a
wilderness that comes up to
"the road."
It is still that way today.
MAN AS ADOLPH MURIE:
Freedom prevails.
Even the bad wolf seeks an
honest living as of yore.
He is a respected citizen,
morally on a par
with everyone else.
In our thinking of McKinley,
let us not have puny thoughts.
Let us think on
a greater scale.
Let us not have those of the
future decry our smallness
of concept and
lack of foresight.
Adolph Murie.
RUNTE: By the 1960s, if
you stood on Glacier Point
and looked down at Yosemite
Valley, you saw lights.
You saw fires.
You saw cars everywhere.
You looked down at that valley
and you said to yourself,
"This looks more like a city
than it does a national park."
COYOTE: For nearly a hundred
years, one of the biggest
attractions in Yosemite
Valley had been
the dramatic firefall.
Every evening in the summer
season, as throngs gathered to
watch, a huge bonfire would
be built on Glacier Point,
then pushed over the edge
to cascade down toward
the valley floor.
In 1968,
Hartzog said no
and ordered a stop to it.
HARTZOG: The firefall
in that magnificent valley was
about as appropriate as horns
on a rabbit, and it should
not be there.
It was an absolutely
spectacular sight, but it was
inappropriate for the silent
tranquility and beauty of that
great valley.
COYOTE: At Yellowstone,
Hartzog also enforced what
George Melendez Wright,
Adolph Murie, and many other
biologists had advocated years
earlier--not just a paper
policy against feeding the
bears, which tourists and park
officials had routinely
ignored, but a concerted
effort at weaning the bears
from human food along the
roadside or at garbage dumps.
SCHULLERY: They saw it as
beneath the dignity
of a national park--
that these bears should in
some sense have a right to
a more natural life and that
people should be experiencing
them in a more natural way.
COYOTE: New park policies now
recommended placing scientific
research as the basis
for management decisions,
emphasizing that the complex
ecology of each park be
restored to what it had
once been and stating that
a national park should
represent a vignette
of primitive America.
Slowly, in the tension between
preservation and use, parks as
nature's sanctuaries and parks
as tourist resorts, things had
begun to shift a little,
back in nature's direction.
George Melendez Wright's
old vision was finally being
taken seriously.
MAN: I like the
quiet out here.
I'm not pestered or
bothered by a lot of people.
I am alone, but I
am not lonely.
When you have plenty of
interests, like the water
and the woods, the birds
and the fish, you don't
get lonely.
Lancelot Jones.
COYOTE: By the 1960s, no one
knew Biscayne Bay, off the
southeastern tip of Florida,
better than Lancelot Jones.
He had been born in the bottom
of a small boat there in 1898
while his father was
frantically sailing his
pregnant mother toward
a hospital in Miami.
From that time on, the
bay had been his home.
His father, Israel Lafayette
Jones, had risen up from
slavery in North Carolina,
migrated to Florida after
the Civil War, and steadily
improved life for himself
and his Bahamian wife.
Eventually, he had managed
to buy 3 of the small,
uninhabited islands that
separate Biscayne Bay from the
Atlantic Ocean and began a
profitable business growing
key limes.
In honor of his favorite
story, "The Knights
"of the Round Table," he had
proudly named his two sons
King Arthur Jones and Sir
Lancelot Jones, hoping,
perhaps, Lancelot said later,
that by giving us great names,
we would become great men.
But 3 years after his father's
death, the Hurricane of 1935
had laid waste to the family's
lime crops and forced Lancelot
into a new line of work as
a fishing guide for wealthy
visitors to Biscayne Bay.
By the 1960s, there were
plenty to go around.
Just across a small channel
from Jones' modest home
on Porgy Key was the Cocolobo
Club, an exclusive retreat
for some of the
multimillionaires who wintered
at Miami Beach, men with
names like Firestone, Maytag,
Honeywell, and Hertz.
They had this exclusive
club down there, and it was
nice for them.
COYOTE: Lancelot Jones became
the favorite fishing guide
for them and for
their politically
well-connected friends.
GREENE: He was a tall,
lanky kind of guy and very
hospitable, and he seemed like
a perfectly happy guy living
out there by himself.
He knew a lot of people.
A lot of important people
would stop by and visit him
when they went down there,
including all these big shots
that belonged to
that private club.
He knew where all the fish
were and where everything else
was, too, down there.
COYOTE: But other millionaires
had other plans for the bay
and its chain of more than
3 dozen pristine islands.
In 1961, a shipping tycoon
announced he intended to
construct a deep-water port,
an oil refinery, and
an industrial complex once
he dredged a deeper channel
through the shallow bay 8
miles out to the ocean.
At the same time, a group of
developers proposed a bridge
linking the mainland to the
islands to do with them what
had already happened at Miami
Beach and Key Biscayne--a
series of high-rise hotels,
retail shopping centers,
and private
beachfront properties.
The organizers convinced
authorities to create the city
of Islandia and ferried a
voting machine to Elliott Key,
where they staged an election
attended by 14 of the 18
registered voters, all of them
absentee landowners hoping to
cash in on the
anticipated real estate boom.
Lancelot Jones, one of only
two full-time residents
of the new Islandia,
was not among them.
He was against their plans and
had also turned down offers
from the refinery
developer to buy Porgy Key.
MAN AS LANCELOT JONES: I never
thought commercialization
of this land was right.
I always felt this land was
not right for development,
that it should stay as it is.
COYOTE: Meanwhile, a small
group had formed to fight
both proposals.
Lloyd Miller, an avid
fisherman, believed the
refinery and seaport would
turn one of Florida's most
fertile fish-breeding grounds
into a stagnant pool
of oily water.
Juanita Greene,
an enterprising young writer
for the "Miami Herald,"
worried that
the considerable financial
interests behind both
developments were
steamrolling the plans toward
hasty approval.
Her own newspaper
supported the refinery.
She thought the public was
not only being shut out
of the decision but would also
be denied access to precious
waterfront once everything
was completed.
It would become, she warned,
"a rich man's paradise."
GREENE: I could see that for
the average Joe who wanted to
go to the beach on Sunday
afternoon, there were fewer
and fewer places to go.
I didn't think that that was
fair that only people who
could live in the fancy hotels
or the condominiums had access
to the beach.
I objected mightily to it and
wrote a story in which I said
"This is a freak city with
lots of power and no people."
And it was true.
COYOTE: At a meeting held
around her dining room table,
Greene, Lloyd Miller,
and another friend,
Art Marshall, decided that
the only way to stop the
development of the islands was
to make it a national park.
Greene persuaded her newspaper
to at least cover the budding
opposition movement and to
allow her to write occasional
opinion pieces advocating
her point of view.
As the public leader of the
opposition, Miller found his
car sprayed with paint.
People urged his
employer to fire him.
An anonymous caller
threatened his family.
GREENE: And somebody
poisoned his dog.
So Lloyd had to put up with a
lot, but he was a determined
man, and he was not gonna
be run out of this.
COYOTE: Slowly their
movement gained strength.
A slate of anti-refinery
candidates was elected to
the county commission.
Local political leaders
withdrew their support
for a bridge to the islands.
And after visiting the bay,
Stewart Udall came out
in favor of protecting it.
In October of 1968, Lloyd
Miller was peering over
the shoulder of President
Johnson as he created Biscayne
National Monument, saving
173,000 acres of the bay,
coral reefs, and islands.
[Seagull cawing]
MAN SINGING: Sitting
in the mornin' sun...
COYOTE: The first private
landowner to sell his land to
the federal government for
the new national monument was
Lancelot Jones--277 acres on 3
islands on the condition that
he be allowed to live out
his life in the family home
on Porgy Key.
MAN SINGING: Sittin'
on the dock of the bay...
GREENE: And that's the
kind of guy he was.
MAN SINGING:
...tide roll away...
GREENE: He was not one of
these greedy people that was
waiting for the developers
to come pay him big bucks
for his land.
He just liked things the way
they were and was willing to
help other people have
an opportunity to enjoy
the islands.
COYOTE: His favorite pastime
was teaching small groups
of schoolchildren about
the bay's fish and sponges
whenever the Park Service
brought them to Porgy Key.
The only compensation he
asked for was a key lime pie.
MAN SINGING: Watching
the tide roll away...
MAN AS LANCELOT JONES: I
like the name "monument."
It means that things here are
going to stay pretty much as
they are today.
Lancelot Jones.
[Singer whistling]
MAN AS WALLACE STEGNER: The
national park idea, the best
idea we ever had,
was inevitable as soon as
Americans learned to confront
the wild continent not
with fear and cupidity,
but with delight,
wonder, and awe.
Once started, it grew like the
backfire it truly was, burning
backup wind against the
current of claim and grab
and raid...
proving that our rapacious
society could hold its hand,
at least in the presence of
stupendous scenery, and learn
to respect the earth for
something besides its
economic value.
Wallace Stegner.
COYOTE: On March 1, 1972,
Yellowstone, the world's first
national park,
celebrated its centennial.
During its 100 years of
existence, the park had seen
its wildlife wantonly
slaughtered by poachers
and then protected by law.
Yellowstone had been guarded
by cavalrymen and park
rangers, defended by poets,
and studied by scientists.
Endlessly painted and
photographed by artists
and amateurs alike, toured by
one American president after
another, seeking everything
from exhilarating inspiration
to simple relaxation.
Yellowstone had been the site
of everything from Indian wars
to bitter fights over
the limits of commercial
exploitation, battles over
the value of nature,
and a continuing argument over
how Americans could enjoy its
treasure house of wonders
without ruining it
for the next generation.
Along the way, Yellowstone
had become one of the most
recognizable symbols
of America itself.
In 1972,
Old Faithful, still spouting
as regularly as it did when
it got its name a century
earlier, would thrill
2.2 million people.
But they would represent
a tiny fraction of the 165
million visitors who came that
year to a park system that now
had a presence in nearly
every state in the union--38
national parks and roughly
200 historic sites, national
monuments, and other places
Americans had set aside
for posterity.
By the 1970s, the park idea
had spread from Yellowstone
all the way around the world,
ultimately becoming, like the
idea of freedom itself, one of
America's greatest exports--
more than 4,000 parks
in nearly 200 nations.
MAN SINGING: Light out singing
And walking in the morning
sunshine
Sunshine daydream
COYOTE: But back in the United
States, in the farthest corner
of the nation, the national
parks were about to experience
their most dramatic expansion.
WOOD: Most people ask,
"What brought you to Alaska?"
but the question to ask
is "What made you stay?"
We just fell in love
with the country.
The country told us what
it should be and what it
shouldn't be.
I think that being out there
was a little bit like Conrad
said of the sea--it's not
for you or against you.
It's just very
unforgiving of errors.
COYOTE: In the hundred years
since Secretary of State
William Seward had purchased
it from Russia in 1867, Alaska
had had the nickname Seward's
Folly, especially by those who
believed a territory so
remote and so far north was
a colossal waste of the $7.2
million Seward had agreed to
pay, even if it was more than
twice the size of Texas.
John Muir had a
different name for it.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR: To the lover
of pure wildness, Alaska is
one of the most wonderful
countries in the world.
This is nature's own
reservation, and every lover
of wildness will rejoice with
me that by kindly frost it is
so well defended.
MAN: Alaska was the last
chance to do it right.
This is it. This is the
end of the line.
So we buckled down, and it
became a very serious affair
about what to do with Alaska.
COYOTE: After Alaska was
granted statehood in 1959,
a federal law was passed to
settle the claims of Alaska's
native peoples, including
the Inupiaq and the Tlingit,
the Aleut and the Athabaskan.
The land was to be divided up,
some for the new state to
control and open for
development if it wished,
some for the tribes, and a
portion to be withheld forever
in the national interest
for all Americans.
As the discovery of vast oil
deposits on the north slope
and the construction of
the trans-Alaska pipeline
demonstrated, the
stakes were enormous.
The fight over what to do with
the federal land would consume
more than a decade and would
quickly become a national one,
waged in the halls of
Congress, involving commercial
and industrial groups
capable of spending millions
of dollars in advertising and
lobbying, versus the Alaska
Coalition, a collection of 50
environmental groups which
quickly mushroomed to
1,500 organizations,
representing 10 million
members, most of whom had
never set foot in Alaska.
It was the largest
grassroots conservation effort
in American history.
POPE: An entire generation
came along and said, "We want
"to be part of this," and for
them, the Alaska battle was
the culmination.
We'd passed clean air
and clean water acts.
We'd passed the
Wilderness Act.
We'd set aside millions
of acres of wilderness
in the 1970s, and suddenly we
had a landscape where we could
really save what
was best about it.
People embraced it.
people rallied to it.
It was the chance
to get it right.
COYOTE: In the mid-1970s,
Congressman Morris Udall
of Arizona, the brother of
Stewart Udall, sponsored
a bill setting aside 110
million acres of federally
owned land in Alaska.
In May of 1978, Udall's
bill passed overwhelmingly
in the House--277 to 31.
But in the Senate, even though
a clear majority favored
the legislation, a threatened
filibuster by Alaska Senator
Mike Gravel tied things up,
preventing a vote before
Congress adjourned.
It appeared that the big
dreams for preserving large
sections of Alaska would
be for nothing.
Then, President Jimmy Carter,
acting on the recommendation
of his Interior Secretary,
Cecil Andrus, decided to
bypass Congress and invoke
the Antiquities Act, a tool
presidents have been using in
the name of conservation since
Theodore Roosevelt.
On December 1, 1978, Carter
took out his pen and signed
executive orders creating 17
national monuments covering
56 million acres of the
most critical areas
in Udall's bill.
In Alaska, all
hell broke loose.
MAN: I'd be in favor of
sending a contingent of state
troopers to Washington to
arrest President Carter
and Andrus for conspiracy to
commit a felony, namely the
theft of millions of acres
of land in Alaska.
DIFFERENT MAN: In a new
national monument near Mt.
McKinley, about 1,500 Alaskans
staged what they said was
a trespass.
They ran races, shot guns,
claimed they had violated 27
laws, and dared park
rangers to arrest them.
HEACOX: You have a frontier
mentality in Alaska.
"We want to do things our way."
The opposition was intense.
Park planes were burned.
President Carter was
burned in effigy.
People protested
in the streets.
RUNTE: In New York City, 99%
of the people would be
for the park.
In Alaska itself, 99% of the
people in some of these towns
were against the parks because
they lived there, and they
didn't see how the tourist
industry was going to benefit
them in any way.
COYOTE: To handle the volatile
situation on the ground,
the administration chose John
Cook, a westerner who had
earned a reputation as
a tough problem-solver.
The parks were in his blood.
His father and his grandfather
had worked at the Grand
Canyon, and he joined the Park
Service the day he graduated
from high school, steadily
working his way up the ladder.
COOK: When I stepped off the
plane, I was the third least
popular person in Alaska.
The least popular
was President Carter.
Cecil Andrus was pretty
unpopular as well.
He was the number two man,
and then it was me.
We were told they would kill
the first Park Service person
that set foot in Duffy's
Tavern in northeast Alaska.
4 days later, I walked into
Duffy's Tavern with a tape
recorder and a roll of maps,
wearing Alaska clothes,
in the middle of winter flew
a ski plane in and sat there
with 200 people, half of them
getting pretty tanked up,
and faced them all, talked to
them, told them what was gonna
happen and what
wasn't gonna happen.
COYOTE: On the Kenai Peninsula
at the head of Resurrection
Bay was the small town of
Seward, named for the
much-maligned politician who
had made Alaska part
of the United States.
Its economy revolved
around fish harvesting
and a commercial port that had
briefly boomed with activity
during the oil pipeline's
construction.
Nearby was the Harding
Icefield, a sheet of ice 700
square miles wide and one mile
thick, spawning more than 30
glaciers, many of which
descend directly to sea level,
where they have carved a
series of deep coastal fjords.
Their waters teem with
wildlife--whales, sea lions,
and seals beyond number.
Carter's proclamation had
created a 570,000-acre Kenai
Fjords National Monument in
hopes it all would eventually
become a national park.
The sentiment in Seward
was dead-set against it.
Twice, the city council
passed resolutions
condemning the idea.
MAN: Beverly Dunham.
DUNHAM: Alaskans are being
criticized for wanting as much
of state lands under
Alaskan control as possible.
We have been termed selfish
for wanting development...
DUNHAM, VOICE-OVER: I
was fearful of it.
I thought the same thing that
most people did, that it was
going to harm us.
Any interference by the
federal government in any way
was offensive to Alaskans
in general and Sewardites
in particular.
We were just fearful of
what would happen to us.
COOK: I was sent up there to
make it work, and what I did
is I hand-picked people.
I brought up a task
force the first year.
I said, "Whatever
you do, never lie to the people.
"Don't whitewash anything.
Go from town to town.
"Live in the towns.
Be truthful."
It's awfully hard to stay
angry at your neighbor if your
neighbor's a good neighbor.
Governor Hammond and I came
up with a term that he used to
help soften things, and that
was that the new national
monuments and tourism would
be Alaska's permanent pipeline
because we won't run out of
visitors but in a long time
run out of oil.
COYOTE: While John Cook tried
to dampen the local hostility
to Carter's proclamations,
the Alaska Coalition prepared
for another Congressional
battle to settle all
the Alaska land issues
once and for all.
My friends, the vote you make
in just a few moments is the
one you've got to live with
and your grandchildren have to
live with.
There ought to be a few places
left in the world the way
the Almighty made them.
We'll never see a buffalo
herd again, but if we're wise
today, your grandchildren
might be able to see
a caribou herd.
This is the test of
conservation in your
Congressional career.
This will be the most
important vote you will cast.
COYOTE: On December 2,
1980, after another year
and a half of debate and
compromise, President
Carter signed the Alaska
National Interest Lands
Conservation Act into law.
It wasn't everything he and
the Alaska Coalition had once
hoped for, but it was still
the largest single expansion
of protected conservation
lands in world history,
creating 4 national forests,
10 national preserves,
16 national wildlife refuges.
The national park system,
with 47 million acres added to
its care, had suddenly
more than doubled in size.
Within those additions were
7 brand-new national parks.
WOMAN: I got a question which--
to write an article on why
we need national parks,
and the question struck me
dumb for a minute.
It was like saying, "Why
do we need air?"
I mean,
we need to have these places,
even if I never go--the
only place I've never been
is Alaska.
Even if I never go to Alaska,
I need to know it's there.
COYOTE: And at Seward,
the national monument at Kenai
Fjords became the seventh
of the new national parks.
5 years later, as the tourist
economy and Seward began to
emerge as a crucial part
of the town's livelihood,
the city council quietly but
officially rescinded its two
previous resolutions
denouncing the park idea.
Several years after that,
they asked that the national
park at their doorstep
be expanded.
DUNHAM: I think it's great.
It has done a lot for Seward.
As far as tourism is
concerned, it has made
a vast difference.
There are, I think, a thousand
seats on day cruisers that
come in and take people
out to the fjords.
It has proven that it
hasn't hurt anything.
If anything, it's enhanced it.
COOK: And in Alaska,
man was acknowledged.
The natives, who were a part
of that landscape long before
European man came and called
it wilderness, were using it.
They still get to use it
for subsistence purposes.
It's still a part of their
culture, and they are a part
of the preservation.
And it's not preserving
museum Indians.
It's preserving a dynamic
culture that's within
a dynamic landscape
that's also changing.
COYOTE: Mt. McKinley
National Park, which had been
in existence since 1917,
was also affected by
the Alaska Lands Act.
Its area was nearly tripled in
size--2.4 million more acres
to the park itself, plus an
additional 1.3 million acres
in two national preserves next
to it--a dramatically larger
expansion than even Adolph
Murie had proposed just before
his retirement.
The old park, surrounded by
the new additions, was now
officially designated a
wilderness, bringing with it
even greater protections to
the land and animals Murie
had championed.
And as if to symbolize all
that had happened, the park's
name was changed to
reflect its deeper history.
It would revert to the
Athabaskan Indian name
for the tremendous mountain
at its core--Denali,
the high one.
COOK: History will, of course,
view the creation of those
national parks along with
Seward's purchase of Alaska.
History will show that it
was the right thing to do.
COYOTE: John Cook would soon
go back to the lower 48 to
become superintendent of Great
Smoky Mountains National Park.
As his father and his father's
father had done, he would pass
on his love for the national
parks to his children,
including his daughter Kayci,
who would become the fourth
generation of the Cook family
to serve in the Park Service.
KAYCI COOK: At the end of
my father's career in 1999,
I had become what I
always wanted to be,
a superintendent, and I used
my power in that position to
honor my father for his 43-
year career with the National
Park Service, and I invoked
the tradition of the military
tattoo at Fort McHenry
National Monument Historic
Shrine, and I bestowed upon my
father the title of Honorary
Colonel of the
Fort McHenry Guard.
I felt very proud doing that
for him, and as we stood up
and saluted one another,
commander to commander, I felt
much more strongly that it was
a mantle that he was passing
to me much more than anything
that I was giving to him.
I have a 4-year-old son,
Sean, and he has already
expressed an interest in being
a ranger like his mommy.
He sees me put this
uniform on every day.
He loves to wear
my hat around.
I think he's showing some
real promise in terms of being
a fifth generation, and that
would not hurt my feelings.
[Car horn honks]
MAN: When I was a child in
Detroit, national parks really
didn't exist.
There were no family trips to
national parks, so it really
didn't exist for me and
for my friends.
We didn't sit around talking
about, "Boy, can't wait to get
"to the Grand Canyon,"
you know.
That didn't come up as a topic
of conversation in Detroit
for me as a child.
But always, there was this
desire to see Yellowstone.
There was a desire to see the
Grand Canyon, to see Yosemite.
There was a desire to fully
invest my physical self and my
spiritual self in America
because that's a part
of America that I didn't know,
and I wanted to become
familiar with it.
COYOTE: In 1984, Shelton
Johnson became the first
generation of his family to
visit a national park when he
stepped off a bus at the
entrance to Yellowstone
and immediately fell in love
with everything it offered.
Johnson soon started a career
in the Park Service and by
the 1990s he was working in
Yosemite as an interpretive
ranger, proudly telling
visitors the little-known
story of the African American
buffalo soldiers, the park's
earliest protectors.
In the last decades of the
20th century, the focus
of the Park Service shifted.
More and more historic
sites were saved, including
reminders of painful episodes
in American history, set aside
on the belief that a
great nation could openly
acknowledge them.
From Kingsley Plantation in
Florida, preserving not only
the owner's grand home,
but also the cluster of small
cabins used by the slaves
who made his comfortable
life possible.
The central high school
in Little Rock, Arkansas,
where in 1957 federal troops
had to escort 9 African
American teenagers past
angry mobs to their classes,
crystallizing the crisis
of school desegregation.
From Andersonville, a
deadly Civil War prison camp
in Georgia to a polished slab
of marble in Washington D.C.
listing the names of 58,000
dead and missing soldiers
who served their
country in Vietnam.
From Sand Creek and Washita on
the Great Plains, where Chief
Black Kettle's peaceful
Cheyenne villagers were
massacred by
American soldiers.
To Manzanar in the high
desert of eastern California,
where American citizens of
Japanese descent were kept
behind barbed wire
during World War II.
From Oklahoma City, where
168 empty chairs now
commemorate the men,
women, and children killed
in a senseless act of
domestic terrorism in 1995.
To a field near Shanksville,
Pennsylvania, that
immortalizes the sacrifices
made by passengers aboard
United Flight 93 on
September 11, 2001.
CRONON: When you're asked,
"Well, what is coherent
"about a system that
contains natural wonders
"and birthplaces
of famous people?"
I think the answer you come to
is that they are all finally
about a vision of where the
United States comes from.
We come from nature, but we
also come from our own past,
and so the interpretation of
nature and history together is
not a distraction
that the parks face.
It is the very core
of the enterprise.
They are all about
where we come from.
COYOTE: In the years to come,
Americans would continue
expanding the number of
national parks and continue
using them in ever-increasing
numbers, from 255 million
visitors in 1990, then closing
in on 300 million visitors
a decade later--each visit an
opportunity to forge a new
relationship to their land,
their nation, and themselves.
MAN: We need national parks
to have people--especially our
kids--understand
what America is.
America is not sidewalks.
America is not stores.
America is not video games.
America is not restaurants.
We need national parks so
people can go there and say,
"Ah. This is America."
DUNCAN: And then it was my
turn to take my family out to
see the national parks.
It was gonna be our own
epic journey as a family.
If there's a national
park between Arizona
and the Canadian border
along the spine of the Rocky
Mountains, we went there.
We broiled in the sun in
Arches and Canyonlands,
went and visited Dinosaur as
I had when I was a small boy,
hiked around Jenny Lake in the
Grand Tetons, then to wear
bear bells, which was very
exciting for the kids
because bears might be around.
At Yellowstone, I got to
watch my children see their
first bison.
And then we came to Glacier
National Park, and it was
something of a sentimental
return for Diane and me
because 13 years earlier,
when we were courting, we had
gone there.
And as we went up Going to the
Sun Highway, I took a picture
of my daughter, about to
become a beautiful woman
in the same place that her
beautiful mother had once sat
for a photograph, and then we
got to Logan Pass, and my son
Will and I decided to go on
a buddy hike and headed up
toward Hidden Lake.
And we came around a corner,
and coming toward us were
these mountain goats. And I
said, "Shh. Just be quiet.
"Don't do anything to disturb
them, and maybe we'll get to
"take a picture."
Well, we just stepped to
the side, and this family
of mountain goats came right
down the trail within about 2
or 3 feet of us, and I don't
know whose eyes were bigger,
Will's or mine.
I had asked everybody to
keep a diary during our trip,
and that night in his diary,
Will wrote, "This was the most
"exciting day of my life."
And so it was the most
exciting day of my life, too.
COYOTE: In January of 1995,
a convoy of trucks entered
Yellowstone National Park
at its northern gate, where
a stone arch dedicated by
Theodore Roosevelt proclaims
the park's purpose--"for
the benefit and enjoyment
"of the people."
Riding in cages in the trucks
were 14 gray wolves recently
captured in western Canada.
Two months later, after
being kept in small pens to
acclimate them to their new
surroundings, the wolves were
set free, part of a long-range
plan to reestablish
the predators in their former
habitat and make the world's
first national park a little
more representative of what it
had once been.
I keep imagining that first
wolf coming out of its cage,
and I think of Adolph being
there, and he probably would
have cried.
Just think--we now have
wolves in Yellowstone.
COYOTE: Within only a few
years, the wolves were
thriving--part, once more,
of the entire
Yellowstone ecosystem.
WHITTLESEY: I was in the back
country with one of my good
friends, and we're standing
out there in the dark, and we
hear this long, low, throaty
howl, and I'd never heard that
sound before.
[Wolves howling]
And I knew immediately what it
was, and I remember standing
there thinking...
"I am so lucky
to get to hear that
"sound that has not been
heard in the back country
"of Yellowstone for
60-some years."
WILLIAMS: I think our
challenge as lovers of our
national parks in the 21st
century will be the challenge
of restoration.
I think that's the story
that's yet to be told,
the story of restoration.
And not only are our national
parks a gift, I think they're
a covenant.
They're a covenant with the
future, saying, "This is
"where we were.
"This is what we loved...
"and now it's in your hands."
MAN: One learns that the
world, though made, is
yet being made, that this is
still the morning of creation.
This grand show is eternal.
It is always
sunrise somewhere.
The dew is never
all dried at once.
A shower is forever falling.
Vapor is ever rising.
Eternal sunrise, eternal
sunset, eternal dawn
and gloaming.
On sea and continents and
islands, each in its turn,
as the round earth rolls.
John Muir.